## Inference to the Best Explanation
- **The purpose of an inference to the best explanation is to justify its conclusion.**
    - Inferences to the best explanation are based on explanations, but their goal or purpose is not to explain what was observed but, instead, to justify belief in the hypothesis that best explains what was observed. In the example in the lecture, when I observe that water is falling on my head, I infer that there must be a leak in the roof, because that is the best explanation of why I observe what I do—namely, that water is falling on my head. This inference is supposed to justify belief in the conclusion that there is a leak in the roof.
    - Scientists use inference to the best explanation to draw conclusions from observations in their experiments.
    - Detectives use inference to the best explanation to solve murder mysteries.
- **Inferences to the best explanation are defeasible.**
    - Even if a hypothesis is the best explanation of what has been observed so far, future additional evidence might make the inference weak. For example, even if the hypothesis that this chemical kills that kind of bacteria is the best explanation that we can imagine right now of why the bacteria died, we might later find out that a lab assistant spilled soap into the dish, and the soap rather than the other chemical might be what killed the bacteria. This additional information about the spilled soap then defeats the strength of the inference to the best explanation. Thus, such arguments are defeasible.
- **Inferences to the best explanation include a premise about an observation that needs to be explained.**
    - An inference to the best explanation must postulate an explanation of something, so it must include a premise about something that needs to be explained. For example, if someone argues “This meat smells very bad, so it must be spoiled”, then the premise that the meat smells very bad is what needs to be explained.
-  **One premise in an inference to the best explanation claims that one explanation is better than others.**
    - If someone claims only that a hypothesis would explain something, then we cannot infer that that explanation is correct, because another conflicting explanation might also explain that event just as well or even better. For example, if the claim that Jamshed committed the murder would explain the eyewitness testimony, but the claim that Jamshed’s twin brother committed the murder also would explain the eyewitness testimony, then we cannot tell whether it was Jamshed or his twin brother who committed the murder. That is why an inference to the best explanation must be an inference to the best explanation. In order to claim that an explanation is the best, the inference needs a premise (possibly suppressed) that the explanation in its conclusion is better than any alternative explanation.  
## Explanatory Virtue
- One explanation is better than another when it has more of the explanatory virtues.
- An explanatory virtue is defined as a feature of an explanation that makes it better as an explanation. Thus, explanations with more of these features are better.


### Power (or Breadth)
An explanation is more powerful or broad when it explains more things. Thus, to say “Your explanation won’t explain anything other than this particular case” is to say that it does not explain many things, so it lacks power or breadth. In other words, it is narrow or ad hoc. An explanation ought to be widely applicable and not ad hoc.
### Conservativeness.
An explanation is radical rather than conservative when it conflicts with well-established knowledge. Biology includes well-established knowledge. Hence, to say “Your explanation conflicts with everything we know about biology” is to say that it is not conservative. An explanation ought not to conflict with well-established knowledge, so it ought to be conservative in this sense. That makes conservativeness an explanatory virtue.
### Modesty
An explanation is more modest when it makes fewer or weaker assumptions or claims, and it lacks modesty when it claims more than is needed in order to explain what it is supposed to explain. Thus, to say “You don’t have to claim so much in order to explain what happened” is to say that your explanation is not modest. An explanation is better when it is modest in this sense, because there is less to criticize and less that could go wrong when an explanation makes fewer claims or assumptions. That is why modesty is an explanatory virtue. (Notice that modesty is closely related to what is sometimes called simplicity.)
### Depth
An explanation is deeper when it leaves fewer questions that need to be answered. Thus, to say “Your explanation just raises new questions that you also need to answer” is to say that it is shallow or lacks depth. An explanation is better when it is deeper, because the goal of explanation is to increase understanding, but we understand something less well when we have more unanswered questions about it.
### Falsifiability
An explanation is falsifiable when some event could show that it is false, so it is unfalsifiable if no event could show that it is false. If the same explanation could apply equally well to any event that occurred, then no event could show that it is false. Thus, to say “Your explanation would apply to whatever happened” is to say that it is compatible with whatever might happen, so it is unfalsifiable. This feature might seem desirable, but actually it is a defect, because an explanation cannot really explain an event if it is compatible with that event not happening. It is applies whether or not the event occurs, then it cannot explain why the event occurs rather than not occurring. Thus, explanations that are unfalsifiable are empty and have no explanatory force. That is why falsifiability is an explanatory virtue.
